•Wolf
The wolf is the largest extant member of the family Canidae,and is further distinguished from coyotes and jackals by a broader snout, shorter ears, a shorter torso
and a longer tail.It is slender and powerfully built, with a large, deeply descending rib cage, a sloping back, and a heavily muscled neck.The wolf's legs are
moderately longer than those of other canids, which enables the animal to move swiftly, and to overcome the deep snow that covers most of itsgeographical range in 
winter,though more short-legged ecomorphs are found in some wolf populations.The ears are relatively small and triangular.The wolf's head is large and heavy, with
a wide forehead, strong jaws and a long, blunt muzzle.The skull is 230–280 mm (9–11 in) in length and 130–150 mm (5–6 in) in width.The teeth are heavy and large,
making them better suited to crushing bone than those of other canids, though they are not as specialized as those found in hyenas.[39][40] Its molars have a flat
chewing surface, but not to the same extent as the coyote, whose diet contains more vegetable matter.[41] Females tend to have narrower muzzles and foreheads, thinner
necks, slightly shorter legs, and less massive shoulders than males.
Adult wolves measure 105–160 cm (41–63 in) in length and 80–85 cm (31–33 in) at shoulder height.The tail measures 29–50 cm (11–20 in) in length, the ears 90–110mm in
height, and the hind feet are 220–250 mm.The size and weight of the modern wolf increases proportionally with latitude in accordance with Bergmann's rule.The mean body 
mass of the wolf is 40 kg (88 lb), the smallest specimen recorded at 12 kg (26 lb) and the largest at 79.4 kg (175 lb).On average, European wolves weigh 38.5 kg (85 lb)
,North American wolves 36 kg (79 lb), and Indian and Arabian wolves 25 kg (55 lb).Females in any given wolf population typically weigh 2.3–4.5 kg (5–10 lb) 
less than males. Wolves weighing over 54 kg (119 lb) are uncommon, though exceptionally large individuals have been recorded in Alaska and Canada.
In central Russia, exceptionally large males can reach a weight of 69–79 kg (152–174 lb).
•Evolution:
The phylogenetic descent of the extant wolf C. lupus from the earlier C. mosbachensis (which in turn descended from C. etruscus) is widely accepted.Among the oldest
fossils of the modern grey wolf is from Ponte Galeria in Italy, dating to 406,500 ± 2,400 years ago.[15] Remains from Cripple Creek Sump in Alaska may be considerably
older, around 1 million years old,though differentiating between the remains of modern wolves and C. mosbachensis is difficult and ambiguous, with some authors
choosing to include C. mosbachensis (which first appeared around 1.4 million years ago) as an early subspecies of C. lupus.

Considerable morphological diversity existed among wolves by the Late Pleistocene. Many Late Pleistocene wolf populations had more robust skulls and teeth than modern
wolves, often with a shortened snout, a pronounced development of the temporalis muscle, and robust premolars. It is proposed that these features were specialized 
adaptations for the processing of carcass and bone associated with the hunting and scavenging of Pleistocene megafauna. Compared with modern wolves, some Pleistocene
wolves showed an increase in tooth breakage similar to that seen in the extinct dire wolf. This suggests they either often processed carcasses, or that they competed
with other carnivores and needed to consume their prey quickly. The frequency and location of tooth fractures in these wolves indicates they were habitual bone
crackers like the modern spotted hyena.

Genomic studies suggest modern wolves and dogs descend from a common ancestral wolf population.A 2021 study found that the Himalayan wolf and the
Indian plains wolf are part of a lineage that is basal to other wolves and split from them 200,000 years ago.Other wolves appear to share most of their common
ancestry much more recently, within the last 23,000 years (around the peak and the end of the Last Glacial Maximum), originating from Siberia or Beringia.
While some sources have suggested that this was a consequence of a population bottleneck,other studies have suggested that this a result of gene flow
homogenising ancestry.

A 2016 genomic study suggests that Old World and New World wolves split around 12,500 years ago followed by the divergence of the lineage that led to dogs from other
Old World wolves around 11,100–12,300 years ago.[20] An extinct Late Pleistocene wolf may have been the ancestor of the dog,with the dog's similarity to the
extant wolf being the result of genetic admixture between the two.The dingo, Basenji, Tibetan Mastiff and Chinese indigenous breeds are basal members of the
domestic dog clade. The divergence time for wolves in Europe, the Middle East, and Asia is estimated to be fairly recent at around 1,600 years ago. Among New World
wolves, the Mexican wolf diverged around 5,400 years ago.
•Breeds:
EURASIAN SUBSPECIES OF CANIS LUPUS
TUNDRA WOLF (CANIS LUPUS ALBUS)
Among the types of wolves that live in cold areas, there is the Canis lupus albus, popularly known as the Tundra wolf or Siberian wolf. It mainly lives in the Russian
tundra and the Siberian region until it reaches Scandinavia. It weighs between 88 and 110 lbs and its fur is long and thick and allows it to survive in extremely cold
temperatures.

The Tundra wolf feeds on reindeer, hares and arctic foxes. In addition, it is a nomadic species that travels following the migrations of the animals that form part of
its diet.

ARABIAN WOLF (CANIS LUPUS ARABS)
Another breed of wolf is the Arabian wolf (Canis lupus arabs), a subspecies of the grey wolf found in the Sinai Peninsula and several Middle Eastern countries. It is
a small desert wolf that weighs only 44 lbs and feeds on carrion as well as smaller animals such as hares.

Unlike other wolves, the Arabian wolf does not howl and does not live in packs. Its coat is sepia with brown, two colors that allow it to camouflage itself perfectly
in sand and rocky areas.

STEPPE WOLF (CANIS LUPUS CAMPRESTRIS)
The steppe wolf (Canis lupus campestris) is a subspecies of the grey wolf that lives in the steppes and deserts of Russia, the Caucasus and Central Asia. Also known
as the Caspian Sea wolf, it is relatively smaller than its congener the common grey wolf, and its fur is denser, thinner and shorter.

It is considered to be a single subspecies with the Caucasian wolf (Canis lupus cubanensis) and the desert wolf (Canis lupus desertorum).

TIBETAN WOLF (CANIS LUPUS CHANCO)
The Tibetan wolf (Canis lupus chanco), or Mongolian wolf, lives in Mongolia, northern and central China, and Korea. It is also found in the region of Oussouri in 
Russia, which it is said to have conquered from China, fleeing humans and taking advantage of the disappearance of the other great predator of the region, the tiger.

In Mongolia, the wolf permeates legends and is considered a totem animal. For wolf, Mongolians say "chono". A separate subspecies of the Mongolian wolf has been 
proposed and then rejected for individuals living in Korea (Canis lupus coreanus), which has a finer snout.  

DINGO (CANIS LUPUS DINGO)
The dingo (Canis lupus dingo) is a variety distributed in Australia and some Asian areas. It is a small wolf that weighs only 70,5 lbs, which is why it is considered 
a dog and is even adopted as a pet.

The dingo's coat has a uniform color that varies between red and yellow; there are even specimens with albinism.
DOG (CANIS LUPUS FAMILIARIS)
The domestic dog (Canis lupus familiaris) is one of the most widespread animals in the world and is a favourite pet of many families. Its physical characteristics 
vary between the different recognized breeds that exist, with wide differences in size, color, coat type, personality and life expectancy.

The domestic dog is a different subspecies. Originally, the most recent theories suggest that the dog as we know it today is the result of crossbreeding between 
dingo wolves, basenji wolves and jackals. However, 14,900 years ago the lines of dogs and wolves separated, although they shared common ancestors. From this separation,
 each species developed differently and the dog was eventually domesticated.

HIMALAYAN WOLF (CANIS HIMALAYENSIS)
The Himalayan wolf (Canis himalayensis) is native to Nepal as well as northern India. They live in small communities and nowadays there are only a small number of 
adult specimens.

As for its appearance, it is a very fine little wolf. Its coat is hard and it comes in light brown, grey and cream colors.

North American subspecies of Canis lupus
ARCTIC WOLF (CANIS LUPUS ARCTOS)
Canus lupus arctos, or Arctic wolf, is an endemic specimen of Canada and Greenland. Its size is smaller than that of other wolves and it weighs around 99 lbs.
As a form of adaptation to its icy environment where it lives, it has a white or light yellow fur that allows it to camouflage itself perfectly. It is also
a subspecies of Canis Lupus.

This species tends to live in rock caves and it feeds on other mammals that live in arctic areas, such as elk, beef and caribou, as well as seals and partridges.

MEXICAN WOLF (CANIS LUPUS BALEYI)
Another breed of wolf is the Canis lupus baileyi, a subspecies that lives in North America, where it prefers to live in deserts and temperate forest zones.
The mexican wolf weighs up to 99 lbs and its fur is of several colors, among which are cream, yellow and black.

This species feeds on cattle, hares, sheep and rodents. Due to the fact that it attacks cattle, it was hunted and nowadays it is considered extinct in the wild,
however, there are some programs for its reproduction in captivity. 

BRITISH COLUMBIAN WOLF (CANIS LUPUS COLUMBIANUS)
The British Columbia wolf was classified as subspecies Canis lupus columbianus in 1941 by senior biologist Edward Goldman.

It was once found in most of British Columbia, parts of the Yukon, Alberta and southwestern Alaska. It has crossed territories with the Alexander Archipelago Wolf and
the Cascade Mountain Wolf.

Canis lupus columbianus was one of the largest subspecies of grey wolves in North America. They weighed between 36 and 68 kg, and had long hairs that were usually 
black, often mixed with grey or brown. They were about 1.52 to 1.78 m long.

VANCOUVER WOLF (CANIS LUPUS CRASSODON)
The Vancouver Island wolf, or, Canis lupus crassodon is endemic to Vancouver Island in Canada. Like the arctic wolf, it has a white coat that allows it to camouflage 
itself in its environment. Although not much is known about this type of wolf, it is known to live in packs of up to 35 individuals and rarely approaches areas
populated by humans.

EXTINCTED SUBSPECIES OF CANIS LUPUS
KENAI PENINSULA WOLF (CANIS LUPUS ALCES) †
The wolf of the Kenai Peninsula was the largest wolf in North America before men exterminated it. It was identified as a subspecies Canis lupus alces in 1941 by senior
 biologist Edward Goldman based on skeletal findings.

He lived on the Kenai Peninsula and adjacent areas in Alaska and fed mostly on elk, hence the name Canis lupus alces. 

NEWFOUNDLAND WOLF (CANIS LUPUS BEOTHUCUS) †
The Newfoundland wolf subspecies (Canis lupus beothucus) was not officially described until 1937 by zooligists G.M. Allen and Thomas Barbour, after it had already been
threatened with extinction. Its scientific name Canis lupus beothucus comes from the Beothuck, the native Newfoundlanders who were officially declared extinct in 1829.

The Newfoundland wolf lived on the island of Newfoundland off the east coast of Canada. Recent evidence has suggested that the first wolves to inhabit the island may
have been there before the last ice age, surviving the ice age in refuges south of the ice cap.

BERNARD'S WOLF (CANIS LUPUS BERNARDI) †
The Bernard's wolf resided on the Isle of Banks in Canada's Northwest Territories. It used to exist in the Victoria Archipelago but was eradicated by over-hunting.

It was not until 1943 that zoologist Rudolph Martin Anderson identified the wolf of Bernard also known as the Bank Island wolf as the subspecies Canis lupus bernardi.
The skin of an adult male and a skull of the Bernard's wolf had been deposited at the National Museum of Canada by explorer Peter Bernard, and it was decided to name
this wolf after him.

FLORIDA BLACK WOLF (CANIS LUPUS FLORIDANUS) †
This canid was officially declared extinct in 1921, although it has not been seen in the wild since 1908. Its status was long controversial, as it was once considered
a subspecies of the red wolf. The Florida black wolf is also known as the Florida wolf or Canis lupus floridanus.

CASCADE MOUNTAINS WOLF (CANIS LUPUS FUSCUS) †
The Cascade Mountain wolf (Canis lupus fuscus) was described by Edward Alphonso Goldman in 1945. Nevertheless, the first description was made earlier by
Sir John Richardson in 1839 and is the authoritative description of the current taxonomy. The Cascade wolf is also known as the brown wolf or Oregon wolf. 

MISSISSIPPI VALLEY WOLF (CANIS LUPUS GREGORYI) †
The Mississippi Valley Wolf (Canis Lupus gregoryi), also known as Gregory's wolf, is a subspecies of the red wolf described in 1937 by Edward Alphonso Goldman.
Its current taxonomy as a subspecies of grey wolf or red wolf is not yet clear, with some authors classifying Gregor's red wolf as either species.

MANITOBA WOLF (CANIS LUPUS GRISEOALBUS) †
The Manitoba wolf, also known as the Saskatchewan wolf or canis lupus griseoalbus, is one of the subspecies of canis lupus. It was described by zoologist Spencer
Baird in 1858. Although the Manitoba wolf is officially classified as a subspecies, many specialists do not recognize it as such, including it with the Hudson Bay wolf.

There is no reliable information on the status of the populations, for which reason it has been declared an extinct species. 

HOKKAIDO WOLF (CANIS LUPUS HATTAI) †
The Hokkaido wolf or Canis lupus hattai, formerly known as Canis lupus rex, was also known as the Ezo wolf or Ezoookami. It was classified as a subspecies of the gray
wolf in 1931 by the Japanese arachnologist Kyukichi Kishida. Hokkaido wolves are descendants of the continental Siberian wolves.

They once inhabited the Japanese island of Hokkaido, the Russian island of Sakhalin and the Kamchatka Peninsula, and the Kuril Islands.

Compared to the Honshu wolf, the Hokkaido wolf is closer to the standard gray wolf in terms of size, dimensions and other characteristics. They were generally light
gray or tanned gray in color.

HONSHU WOLF (CANIS LUPUS HODOPHILAX) †
Identified in 1839 as a subspecies of the grey wolf by the Dutch zoologist Coenraad Temminck. The Honshu wolf (Canis lupus hodophilax), like its cousin from the island
 of Hokkaido, has totally disappeared from the wilderness of Japan. It was declared officially extinct in 1905, when the last specimen was shot. 

MOGOLLON MOUNTAIN WOLF (CANIS LUPUS MOGOLONENSIS) †
The Mongollon mountain wolf was classified as a subspecies of the gray wolf Canis lupus mongolonensis by biologist Edward A. Goldman in 1937. Its name was given to it 
by the Mogollon Mountain Indians in Arizona and New Mexico.

He lived in the Mogollon Mountains region of central Arizona and in the southeast and Sacramento (central) mountains of New Mexico.

TEXAS WOLF (CANIS LUPUS MONSTRABILIS) †
Described in 1937 by the biologist Edward Alphonso Goldman, this canid died five years later in 1942 and was posthumously merged by some authors with the Mexican wolf.
Today, the Texas wolf (canis lupus monstrabilis) is recognized as a distinct subspecies but its status is not unanimous. 

SOUTHERN ROCKY MOUNTAIN WOLF (CANIS LUPUS YOUNGI) †
While still alive, the southern rock wolf (canis lupus youngi) occupied the regions of Nevada, Arizona, Utah and Colorado. Its main habitat included coniferous and 
deciduous forests and adjacent grasslands.

As a result of hunting, trapping and poisoning campaigns aimed at eradicating wolves from the wild, the southern rock wolf eventually became extinct.
It was officially declared extinct in 1935.

•Behavior:
1.Movement:
Wolves are highly social animals that live and travel in groups called packs, which usually consist of 5 to 10 members, although the number can vary. Packs are 
structured and organized, often comprising a dominant breeding pair (the alpha male and female) and their offspring. Sometimes, unrelated wolves may join the pack.

In the wild, a pack of wolves often travels together for hunting, protecting their territory, and raising their young. The group size can depend on factors such as
the availability of prey, habitat conditions, and the time of year. A group of 7 wolves traveling together would likely include the alpha pair, a few subadult wolves 
(their older offspring), and potentially younger pups. Packs that are this size are considered optimal because they balance efficiency in hunting with the ability to
share resources.

Wolves travel and hunt in coordinated ways, using their pack structure to communicate effectively and bring down prey much larger than an individual wolf could manage
alone. This cooperative behavior is one of the defining characteristics of wolves and their survival strategy.

If you'd like, I can elaborate on how wolves hunt or interact within a pack.

2.Mating
Wolves have a structured mating process that typically occurs during the winter months, usually between January and March. The female enters estrus, a period of
fertility lasting about 7 to 10 days, during which she releases pheromones signaling her readiness to mate. Wolves are generally monogamous, with the alpha male and
female usually mating for life. Courtship involves behaviors such as following the female and nuzzling, with the female showing signs of receptivity. Mating is brief
and occurs several times during the estrus period, culminating in a "tie," where the male and female remain physically connected for up to 30 minutes to ensure the
male’s sperm is retained. After successful mating, the female’s pregnancy lasts about 63 days, and she gives birth to a litter of 4 to 7 pups in a den. Both the alpha
male and female, along with other pack members, contribute to the care of the pups, ensuring their survival. The entire pack works together to protect and feed the
young, and by the time the pups are a few months old, they begin learning to hunt and survive in the wild. The cooperative nature of the pack ensures the pups grow
strong and the genetic strength of the pack is maintained.They only mate with their partner only.
3.Attacking
Wolves are highly strategic and social hunters, relying on teamwork and physical abilities to successfully hunt prey. Their attack begins with stalking and observing
potential targets within a herd, often selecting weaker, older, or injured animals. They carefully approach while staying downwind to avoid detection. Once a target is
chosen, the wolves initiate a chase, testing the prey’s stamina and attempting to separate it from the herd. Using teamwork, the pack isolates the chosen animal,
sometimes splitting up to confuse it or drive it into a trap. Wolves communicate through body language and vocalizations during the hunt, coordinating their movements.
Stronger and more experienced members usually lead the attack, biting critical areas like the neck or legs to immobilize the prey. The kill is made by targeting vital
spots, often severing the windpipe or inflicting fatal injuries. After the prey is subdued, the pack begins feeding, with the dominant members eating first.
Wolves rely on endurance over speed and adapt their strategies based on the prey and terrain, showcasing their intelligence and cohesive pack dynamics.
4.Behavior with humans:
Wolves typically avoid humans, as they are naturally wary and shy creatures. In the wild, they view humans as potential threats and will generally keep their distance.
However, if cornered or threatened, they may exhibit defensive aggression, though such encounters are rare. Wild wolves do not hunt humans, and attacks are 
exceptional, usually occurring under abnormal circumstances like rabies or extreme hunger. On the other hand, wolves raised in captivity or those in rehabilitation 
programs may display more comfort around humans, though they still retain wild instincts. Wolf-dog hybrids, which are a mix of domestic dogs and wolves, can show a 
blend of behaviors from both species, with some displaying loyalty similar to dogs, but others may exhibit unpredictable behaviors due to their wild traits.
In controlled environments, where wolves are studied or cared for by researchers, they may become more accustomed to human presence, but they maintain their wild 
instincts and communication styles. Ultimately, while wolves can form bonds with humans under certain conditions, their natural behavior tends to lean towards caution 
and avoidance in the wild.
Why wolf are less tamed than big cats:
Wolves are less commonly tamed than lions and tigers due to differences in their social structures, behavior, and evolutionary relationships with humans. Wolves are
highly social animals with complex pack dynamics, making them more bonded to their own kind and less likely to fully integrate with humans. Even when raised in
captivity, wolves retain strong wild instincts and a natural wariness of humans, which makes them unpredictable and difficult to train. In contrast, lions and tigers,
while still dangerous, are more adaptable to captivity. Tigers are solitary, and lions have simpler social structures, allowing them to form bonds with humans when
hand-raised. Historically, wolves have been seen as threats to livestock and humans, leading to persecution rather than domestication efforts. Meanwhile, lions and
tigers were often kept as symbols of power and status, fostering more efforts to tame and train them for entertainment or display. Additionally, wolves require large
territories and specific care, making them harder to manage in captivity. Overall, the combination of behavior, history, and practical challenges explains why wolves
are less tamed than lions and tigers.
•Lifespan
The lifespan of wolves, lions, and tigers varies depending on whether they live in the wild or captivity. Wolves typically live 6 to 8 years in the wild due to
threats like injury, disease, and human conflict, but in captivity, they can live up to 12 to 16 years with proper care. Lions, on the other hand, have a lifespan of 
10 to 15 years in the wild, with males often living shorter lives due to territorial conflicts and injuries, while in captivity, they can live up to 20 years or more.
Tigers share a similar lifespan, living 10 to 15 years in the wild, where poaching and habitat loss pose significant risks, but they can reach 20 to 25 years in 
captivity with access to consistent food and medical care. While wolves tend to have shorter lifespans than lions and tigers, captivity significantly extends the life
expectancy of all three species by providing a safe and stable environment free from natural threats.
•Intelligence
Wolves and big cats all exhibit remarkable intelligence, but their cognitive abilities differ based on their social structures and natural behaviors.
Wolves are highly intelligent animals, known for their complex social dynamics and ability to work cooperatively within their packs. Their problem-solving skills and
communication methods, such as vocalizations and body language, reflect their need for coordination in hunting and maintaining pack hierarchy. Lions, while also social,
rely on simpler group dynamics within their prides, using teamwork primarily in hunting. Their intelligence is evident in their strategic hunting techniques and
ability to adapt to their environment. Tigers, being solitary by nature, display a different kind of intelligence, excelling in stealth, patience, and strategic
planning during hunts. They are also known for their ability to learn and adapt to changing circumstances, especially in captivity. While all three species demonstrate
advanced cognitive abilities, wolves' social intelligence stands out, while lions and tigers showcase impressive problem-solving and hunting strategies tailored to
their respective lifestyles.